Mapping guidelines (#26)
EphemeralSpace/docs: src/guidelines/mapping.md

# Mapping Guidelines
```admonish warning "Disclaimer"
Toast is intended to be the only station map for a good while. If you are contributing to the main Ephemeral Space repo, your application of this doc will probably be fairly limited.
```

Presently, these guidelines are not very meaty. This only really covers the most common mistakes mappers make.
Even though this is a guide for Ephemeral Space, and is written as such, most of the core principles here can generally be applied to other forks.

## Maintenance
This is the #1 thing most new mappers mess up. Good maintenance areas are extremely pivotal to the game to function correctly. They generally act as perfect cover for anyone trying to do something in secrecy, or get around somewhere in a roundabout way.

If you are going to take away anything from these guidelines - **it is vitally important that you do not add your maintenance in negative space as an afterthought.** It needs to be blocked out with the rest of the station.

### Availability

> Maintenance should exist around the entire station, and almost every room should have a maintenance exit--though, one must be mindful of the fact that maintenance acts as an effective backdoor access spot. Usually, because of this, rooms like the Captain's Quarters, Vault, or Armory typically lack any maintenance exits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintenance should exist around the entire station, and almost every room should have a maintenance exit--though one must be mindful of the fact that maintenance acts as an effective backdoor access spot. Usually, because of this, rooms like the Captain's Quarters, Vault, or Armory typically lack any maintenance exits.
```

- Concrete tiles are noisy, grungy, and meant for planetside areas. While they're okay to use on station in some capacity, it's generally not smart to use them inside of a space station in basic areas like command or security.

- Mining walls and pod floors are meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with each other, and work best for isolated "pod" type buildings. They're also fairly detailed, making them clash with most other walls when used alongside them. It's generally weird to use them in a regular room inside of a space station, or mix them with other structures.

- Wood tables look fantastic when inside a more casual area like an office or courtroom, but it would be really strange if science used them instead of normal steel tables.

- Glass tiles are excessively fancy and high contrast, so it's a bad idea to use them across your station in every other department.

Some additional examples of off-kilter deviations that would be fine:

- A biodome area that uses concrete tiles on a station centered around using grass and other similar things as a core thematic element.

> - A mining pod stitched on to the station through an airlock on a station that feels like a cobbled-together scrap heap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A mining pod stitched onto the station through an airlock on a station that feels like a cobbled-together scrap heap.
```

Similarly, you really shouldn't use special steel tile types (monotile, diagonal tile, minitile, etc.) outside of very specific situations. These tiles are very noisy and almost always look worse then the alternative for normal station environments.

If you are going to use them at all (not desired for Toast due to its overall simple aesthetic, probably,) you should use them for the accentuation of specific areas. For example, only using monotiles to highlight structures, or only using diagonal floors in bathrooms.

Additionally, make sure to keep techmaint tile usage restricted to maintenance (or other similar areas.) These tiles are designed to be grungy and do not look very good when used in regular areas as detailing, with no surrounding thematic justification.

### Decaling
Quarter-tile decals are your best friend and should be your go-to for when you need to spice up a room's visuals. They look amazing, are extremely versatile, useful for conveyance/navigability, and simplistic enough to never really create much dissonance between whatever you are making and the art style.

> *Do not line every single room in departmentally colored decals with complex patterns!* While floor designs can be extremely useful and pretty, it can become overbearing and messy quickly if you are forcing every room to have some kind of crazy pattern to stand out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Do not line every single room in departmentally colored decals with complex patterns!* While floor designs can be extremely useful and pretty, they can become overbearing and messy quickly if you are forcing every room to have some kind of crazy pattern to stand out.
```

Additionally--you should **completely avoid using trim decals** (at least, while they exist here--there's no way to remove them for now without breaking map compatibility with other forks).

> While these *theoretically* have their uses in delineating the boundary between tile changes, I see mappers footgun themselves by using them in basically every situation that is not that, and even *in* those situations they tend to look fairly ugly. Effectively, they are worse then quarter-tile decals in basically every situation - they are more visually noisy, less versatile, and look terrible when doing anything complex with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While these *theoretically* have their uses in delineating the boundary between tile changes, I see mappers footgun themselves by using them in basically every situation that is not that, and even *in* those situations, they tend to look fairly ugly. Effectively, they are worse than quarter-tile decals in basically every situation - they are more visually noisy, less versatile, and look terrible when doing anything complex with them.
```

## Maintenance
This is the #1 thing most new mappers mess up. Good maintenance areas are extremely pivotal to the game to function correctly. They generally act as perfect cover for anyone trying to do something in secrecy, or get around somewhere in a roundabout way.

If you are going to take away anything from these guidelines - **it is vitally important that you do not add your maintenance in negative space as an afterthought.** It needs to be blocked out with the rest of the station.

### Availability
Maintenance should exist around the entire station, and almost every room should have a maintenance exit--though, one must be mindful of the fact that maintenance acts as an effective backdoor access spot. Usually, because of this, rooms like the Captain's Quarters, Vault, or Armory typically lack any maintenance exits.

As a vital component to *both* social deduction and survival gameplay, it is generally very important to have access to maintenance be widely available no matter where you are on the station.

### Sizing & General Layout

> Maintenance needs to be fairly spacious in of itself. While it's not a sin to map 1-tile-wide maintenance occasionally, you almost certainly want 2-to-3-tile-wide maintenance to be your default size. Maps with primarily 1-tile-wide maintenance tunnels generally tend to feel very uninteresting and anemic on the maintenance front, as there's not really any room to put any interesting fixtures in them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintenance needs to be fairly spacious in itself. While it's not a sin to map 1-tile-wide maintenance occasionally, you almost certainly want 2-to-3-tile-wide maintenance to be your default size. Maps with primarily 1-tile-wide maintenance tunnels generally tend to feel very uninteresting and anemic on the maintenance front, as there's not really any room to put any interesting fixtures in them.
```

### Standard Tiling

Normal, 4-corner steel floor tiles should be your go-to in 95% of situations. They are the most fitting & best looking tile type for the sanitized-feeling space station environment that Space Station 14 usually takes place in.

Avoid using white and dark steel tiles for hallways and other generic areas. They become fairly unsightly when spammed in such a way, and also generally look significantly better when used as an element of contrast. 
Suddenly, in comparison to an all-white hallway set, medbay and science's sterile white floor might not seem so interesting anymore, and command's professional aesthetic just erodes in to a homogenized sludge next to an all-black hallway set.

Similarly, you really shouldn't using special steel tile types (monotile, diagonal tile, minitile, etc.) outside of very specific situations. These tiles are very noisy and almost always look worse then the alternative for normal station environments.

> If you are going to use them at all (not desired for Toast due to its overall simple aesthetic, probably,) you should use them for accentuation of specific areas. For example, only using monotiles to highlight structures, or only using diagonal floors in bathrooms.

Author: this doesn't seem right?

### Alternative Aesthetics
Just to hammer the point in: **Don't unnecessarily force yourself to create variance using detailing.** More likely then not, if you use everything the game has available to you, you are going to end up with something grievously overdetailed or ugly. It is okay to keep things basic & standard.

Obviously, experimentation is good, but you should *really* be aware of how the tiles & structures you are using are normally used. There might not be a wide array of walls or tiles that are normally used, but that doesn't mean that you should be using highly specialized tiles & structures in normal station environments.

Some general no-nos and examples:

- Brass structures are intended to be used by Clock Cult and generally don't make much sense to put on a normal space station in a public area.

> - Concrete tiles are noisy, grungy, and generally meant for planetside areas. While they're okay to use on station in some capacity, it's generally not smart to use them inside of a space station with no signs of weathering.

Author: i'm also pretty sure this is not correct

> - Concrete tiles are noisy, grungy, and generally meant for planetside areas. While they're okay to use on station in some capacity, it's generally not smart to use them inside of a space station with no signs of weathering.

Reviewer: How so?

> - Concrete tiles are noisy, grungy, and generally meant for planetside areas. While they're okay to use on station in some capacity, it's generally not smart to use them inside of a space station with no signs of weathering.

Author: "inside a space station" just doesn't really flow as well as "inside of a space station."

> - Mining walls and pod floors are meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with eachother, and work best for isolated "pod" type buildings. They're also fairly detailed, making them clash with most other walls when used alongside them. It wouldn't look very good to use them for a regular room inside of a space station.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Mining walls and pod floors are meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with each other, and work best for isolated "pod" type buildings. They're also fairly detailed, making them clash with most other walls when used alongside them. It wouldn't look very good to use them for a regular room inside a space station.
```

Regardless of purpose - if you're making a new map for a new feature, modifiying toast, or otherwise just making a fork and want to make a map like toast, this is the place to go.

## Maintenance
This is the #1 thing most new mappers mess up. Good maintenance areas are extremely pivotal to the game's normal functioning. They generally act as perfect cover for anyone trying to do something in secrecy, or get around somewhere in a roundabout way.

Generally speaking, if you are going to take away anything from these guidelines - **it is vitally important that you do not add your maint in negative space as an afterthought.** It needs to be blocked out with the rest of the station.

### Availability
Maintenance should exist around the entire station, and almost every room should have a maintenance exit - though, one must be mindful of the fact that maint acts as an effective backdoor access spot. Usually rooms like the Captain's Quarters, Vault, or Armory don't have maintenance exits because of this.

> As a vital component to *both* social deduction and survival gameplay, it's very important to have access to maintenance be widely available no matter where you are on the station

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a vital component to *both* social deduction and survival gameplay, it's very important to have access to maintenance be widely available no matter where you are on the station.
```

### Sizing & General Layout

> Maintenance needs to be fairly spacious in of itself. While it's not a sin in of itself to 1-tile wide maintenance occasionally, you almost certainly want 2-to-3-tile wide maintenance to be your default size. Maps with primarily 1-tile-wide maintenance tunnels are usually painfully boring to navigate and really feel bad to move around in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maintenance needs to be spacious. While it's not a sin to map 1-tile wide maintenance occasionally, you almost certainly want 2-to-3-tile wide maintenance to be your default size. Maps with primarily 1-tile-wide maintenance tunnels are usually painfully boring to navigate and really feel bad to move around in.
```

Generally speaking, you will need to change the size of a maint tunnel on a case-by-case basis, but it's best to lean on being more spacious.

> Now, 2-tile-wide (and 3-tile-wide) maintenance may seem a bit overkill at first, but the usage of general obstructions such as walls, grilles, and girders and make the actual playable space end up being (and feeling) a lot smaller (and more varied, too - make sure to place a good amount of them.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, 2 and 3-tile-wide maintenance may seem a bit overkill at first, but the usage of general obstructions such as walls, grilles, and girders make the actual playable space end up feeling a lot smaller and more varied, too. Make sure to place a good amount of them.
```

u overuse parentheticals i think

> Starting with such a high amount of empty spce is also important for being able to populate maintenance with the structures / loot spawns it is generally known for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with such a high amount of empty space is also important for being able to populate maintenance with the structures / loot spawns it is generally known for.
```

### Side Rooms
Even if your map is small, you should make sure to add lots of side-rooms in maintenance. Though they may just seem like places to put fun setpieces in at first, these locations are deceptively important.

Generally, they're a great spot for players to build, socalize, and hide in, and are a core fixture of both antagonist and (sometimes) non-antagonist gameplay.

> Generally speaking, all of these rooms should use the **Walled Maint Door Variant Spawner** for their entrances. These provide very effective plausible deniability for antagonists and also make for more interesting round-to-round variance. Rooms that are hybrid side-room-and-maint-exit (like the medical backroom on Toast) should generally not use the walled variant, though.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Side rooms are a great spot for players to build, socialize, and hide in, and are a core fixture of both antagonist and (sometimes) non-antagonist gameplay.

Almost all of these rooms should use the **Walled Maint Door Variant Spawner** for their entrances. These provide very effective plausible deniability for antagonists and also make for more interesting round-to-round variance. Rooms that are hybrid side-room-and-maint-exit (like the medical backroom on Toast) should avoid using the walled variant, though.
```

Additionally, it's not a good idea to populate these rooms (or otherwise random 1x1 squares in walls, or what have you) with valuable loot that can easily immediately be rushed by anyone with map knowledge.

Though, points of interest in maintenance (like SS13 KiloStation's spider-gaurded improvised shotgun, or Toast's maints security post) are generally good to have as long as there's some element of intruige or friction to getting the valuables.

### Random Spawners

> Random spawners are another core fixture of maintenance. They're a core part of the game's random variance and are generally what makes maintenance so interesting to explore. Make sure to place a decent amount of them, both in structure form and on-the-ground form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Random spawners in maintenance are a core part of the game's random variance and are generally what makes maintenance so interesting to explore. Make sure to place a decent amount of them, both in structure form and on-the-ground form.
```

Though they are important, you should also *not* use random spawners for everything. If you even have them in maintenance to begin with, it's generally a good idea to have static spawns for emergency closets / fire lockers next to important locations like arrivals or dorms, pairs of water/fuel tanks, and oxygen canisters at key locations.

**Using upstream random spawners over ES ones with similar loot pools is generally not advised unless you know what you are doing,** since they usually have pretty confusing and inconsistent loot pools and are pretty hard to parse while mapping.

> In any case, at least for maintenance mapping, you're almost certainly going to get more interesting variance out of an Exposed Maintenance Spawner then something like a fluff spawner or industrial fluff spawner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Using upstream random spawners over ES ones with similar loot pools is generally not advised unless you know what you are doing,** since they usually have pretty confusing and inconsistent loot pools and are pretty hard to parse while mapping.
```

## Visuals & Aesthetic

> Above all else: *simplicity is king.* It's perfectly OK to use only basic steel tiles and simple-to-no-decaling for a given room - in fact, that is what you generally should be doing 90% of the time. The game's artstyle generally relies on things being simplistic, so overall, you should try not to overcomplicate things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Above all else: *simplicity is king.* It's perfectly OK to use only basic steel tiles and simple-to-no-decaling for a given room--in fact, that is what you generally should be doing 90% of the time. The game's artstyle generally relies on things being simplistic, so you should try not to overcomplicate things.
```

### Standard Tiling

> As alluded to in the main blurb, Normal, 4-corner steel floor tiles should be your go-to in 95% of situations. They are the most fitting & best looking tile type for the sanitized-feeling space station environment that Space Station 14 usually takes place in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Normal, 4-corner steel floor tiles should be your go-to in 95% of situations. They are the most fitting & best looking tile type for the sanitized-feeling space station environment that Space Station 14 usually takes place in.
```

### Alternative Aesthetics
Just to hammer it in: **Avoid unnessecarrily forcing yourself to create variance.** More likely then not, if you use everything the game has available to you, you are going to end up with something greviously overdetailed or ugly. It is ok to keep things basic & standard.

Obviously, experimentation is good, but you should *really* be aware of how the tiles & structures you are using are normally used. There might not be a wide array of walls or tiles that are normally used, but that doesn't mean that you should be using highly specialized tiles & structures in normal station environments.

Some general no-nos and examples:

- Brass structures are intended to be used by Clock Cult and generally don't make much sense to put on a normal space station in a public area.

- Concrete tiles are noisy, grungy, and generally meant for planetside areas. While they're okay to use on station in some capacity, it's generally not smart to use them inside of a space station with no signs of weathering.

> - Mining Walls and Pod Floors are meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with eachother, and work best for isolated "pod" type buildings. They're also fairly detailed, making them clash with most other walls when used alongside them. It wouldn't look very good to use them for a regular room inside of a space station.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Mining walls and pod floors are meant to be used exclusively in conjunction with eachother, and work best for isolated "pod" type buildings. They're also fairly detailed, making them clash with most other walls when used alongside them. It wouldn't look very good to use them for a regular room inside of a space station.
```

- Wood tables look fantastic when inside of a more casual area like an office area or courtroom, but it would be really strange if science used them instead of normal steel tables.

- Glass tiles are excessively fancy and high contrast, so it'd generally bad idea to use them across your station in ever other department.

### Decaling
Quarter-tile decals are your best friend and should be your go-to for when you need to spice up a room's visuals. They look amazing, are extremely versatile, useful for conveyance / navigability, and simplistic enough to never really create much dissonance between whatever you are making and the artstyle.

Despite this - it is extremely important to remember the golden rule of simplicity. *Do not line every single room in departmentally colored decals with complex patterns!* While patterns and such can be extremely useful and pretty, it can get really overbearing and messy quickly if you are forcing every room to have some kind of crazy pattern to stand out.

Additionally - you should completely avoid using trim decals (at least, while they exist here - there's no way to remove them for now without breaking map compatibility with other forks.)

> They are a lot less visually cohesive and versatile then quarter-tile decals, and when used for patterns often look *extremely noisy and overdetailed.* While they can be fine when used in isolation, they look fairly inconsistent when mixed with quarter-tile decals, making them generally not worth using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally--you should completely avoid using trim decals (at least, while they exist here--there's no way to remove them for now without breaking map compatibility with other forks). They are a lot less visually cohesive and versatile then quarter-tile decals, and when used for patterns often look *extremely noisy and overdetailed.* While they can be fine when used in isolation, they look fairly inconsistent when mixed with quarter-tile decals, making them not worth using.
```

## Atmos Piping
For maximum ease-of-use and readability, piping should generally be easy to access as possible for anyone wanting to tinker with it. Because of this, you should avoid piping over structures and crossing other pipes (especially within departments!) when possible, and only use layers / pipe through windows when absolutely required.

Avoid piping through walls at all costs, as it is a gigantic pain to deal with as a player.

> Additionally - in toast, all vents go through the front of the department, and all scrubbers go through maint. This is mostly superficial, and you can technically do it in any order, but while mapping Atmos it personally helped with avoiding the "atmos sins" listed above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Toast, all vents go through the front of the department, and all scrubbers go through maint. This is mostly superficial, and you can technically do it in any order, but while mapping Atmos it personally helped with avoiding the "atmos sins" above.
```
